Hey guys, welcome back.
All right, so everything we have covered thus far,
and it's really about 25 years or so
of technological advancements, and we
covered it in, like, 25 minutes,
has led up to this point, the point where
we finally become masters of that
metallic beast that we own, and can finally start using them
for ever increasing amounts of use cases.
And the reason we can use that box
for an increasing amount of use cases
is due to the development of
what we call desktop software.
Now, what do I mean by this
concept of "desktop software"?
Well, we've already established
what software is, remember?
If you weren't actually paying attention,
you have hardware, i.e. the hard actual pieces
of your computer, like the motherboard,
the processor, the RAM, the housing etc.,
and then anything that's built and runs on
or within this hardware system is called software.
It's soft, well, because, I think it's because
it doesn't exist in physical space.
I mean, well, it technically does,
but you only interact with it
within the operations of the hardware setup.
Desktop is actually just a term used to
coin your computer's operating system.
Technically, when you first see
your operating system, you know,
it will have that blank space where you
have your background image - mine is,
I think it's a bear taking a phone call,
don't ask why - well, that's kind of similar, I guess,
to how your desk looks, because you put things
on your desk, and then you can access them.
Specifically, you can put pieces of paper and folders.
Now, remember, when they came up
with this set of names, this was back
when computers were still a novelty, and the
rest of the world was in fact using paper.
Ok, well, any application or self-contained
script, or series of logic that runs
within your operating system is going to be
referred to as desktop software.
You can usually go to your desktop and just open it.
That's, you know, desktop software.
Let's start from scratch so we can visualize this.
When we boot up our computers,
we have what's called an operating system,
which effectively does two things.
One, it simplifies the process of using
a computer by letting you visually select
and manipulate the files and things you need to use.
The second thing it does is it translates
everything you do, and save,
and send back down to the lowest level of
code that your computer can understand,
called machine code, so that the angry beast
can actually do something with its hardware.
Fun fact: why is it that video games can only be
played on just Windows or just Macintosh OS?
Well, it's because computers that run
these operating systems are actually different
and have different machine code.
Mac OS translates to one machine code
language and Windows to another.
So if I wanted to make a game for both, I would
effectively have to write that application twice.
Why the two computers accept
different types of machine code?
I don't know, we don't ask these questions.
Now, within the operating system that
we just kind of recapped is the ability to
make little miniature operating systems or what we
call applications that serve different functions.
A browser, or your Skype application, or a mail client,
these are all examples of these smaller applications.
Now, you have to think about this almost
like one of those little Russian doll things.
You know those dolls that have progressively smaller
versions of themselves inside of themselves.
It's kind of like that.
Within the hardware of your computer runs an operating system,
within the operating system runs desktop software.
In order for these three layers to work,
they must be able to all communicate
with the system it's enclosed in.
Desktop software communicates in a specific
high level programming language
to its operating system, which then
relays this information and translates,
interprets it down to machine code
for the hardware to take action on.
Typically, then the hardware will send a signal
back up to the operating system,
saying maybe "Yes, I did that thing you asked,"
and the operating system will then
translate that again back into
high level code, and pass it back up,
and then your application can respond.
It's important to think about these concepts as layers.
Hardware sits at the bottom, and then
the operating systems sit at the top,
then desktop software sits on top of that.
And now, if you think that is confusing, that three layer pie, well,
you're going to have a rough ride, because
we're going to add at least five more layers.
One other concept worth understanding
at this point is that there was a point in time
where operating systems just helped you navigate your hardware
and any function or tool you could use
or had access to was actually created
by the company that made the operating system itself.
If anyone remembers the old days of Mac OS, they tried to
control almost all the applications they had on the system.
Apple made the mail app, it made the clock app,
it made the calendar app.
Ironically, this is still the case today,
but since, they've opened up, and at least
given you the option to, say, download
a different version of your mail app.
By doing this, they became what we call a "platform."
Now, literally, a platform is something you stand on,
and in the computer world it means
creating a software environment where
anyone else can make something
that runs within your operating system
and then distribute it to other users.
So, within your little Russian doll metaphor,
anyone that wants to can make
their own doll and stick it in there.
I think I've kind of exhausted that metaphor,
but you get the point.
Now, the idea of platform-izing operating
systems really wasn't actually a thing
until sometime in the 90s, and before that,
we really did not see the explosion
we see today in computer usage.
Think of it like this.
Remember when the iPhone came out
and everyone thought it was interesting,
but they also thought that it had virtually
no apps, and virtually no uses,
so no one really went out of their way to buy it?
At the advent of desktop software, that's the
same cross section where computers were at.
People kind of got the possibility
that these computers were opening up,
but as of yet, they had not realized its possibilities,
because of a lack of an application ecosystem.
These companies that made the operating
systems could only make so many applications.
Nowadays though, everything is a platform.
Your phone is a platform, your watch is a platform,
your TV is a platform, believe it or not.
I even saw, there was a refrigerator the other day
that lets you install third party apps
...for your refrigerator.
Ok, let's recap it, although this
was a short lecture (just joking).
After the operating system came along,
there was a need to use computers
in many different ways, and there
was really no limit to human creativity
when it came to different things you could do.
Once operating systems became a platform,
so to speak, we saw desktop applications
- and, remember, desktop applications, when
we say that we're referring to applications
that run from your desktop - we saw
more and more people kind of piling in
on the computer technology train,
and creating their own applications.
On a technical level, desktop software
is written in a high level code
that sends this code to your operating system,
which acts as a relay and an interpreter with your hardware.
And so, finally you understand on a technical level
how that game Minesweeper really works.
What other questions could you possibly have?
All right guys, see you in the next section!